Add draft for dask-cudf (#8)
dask/dask-blog: _posts/2019-01-13-dask-cudf-first-steps.md

You can also view the experiment in this post as
[a notebook](https://github.com/dask/dask-blog/blob/0637e68d78cdf1332ee72275061bf3b9a1625d55/_posts/2019-01-13-dask-cudf-first-steps.md).

And here is a table of results:

<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Architecture</th>
    <th>Time</th>
    <th>Bandwidth</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th> Single CPU Core </th>
      <td> 3min 14s </td>
      <td> 50 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> Eight CPU Cores </th>
      <td> 58s </td>
      <td> 170 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> Forty CPU Cores </th>
      <td> 35s </td>
      <td> 285 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> One GPU </th>
      <td> 11s </td>
      <td> 900 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> Eight GPUs </th>
      <td> 5s </td>
      <td> 2000 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Building Blocks: cuDF and Dask
------------------------------

Building a distributed GPU-backed dataframe is a large endeavor.
Fortunately we're starting on a good foundation and
can assemble much of this system from existing components:

1.  The [cuDF](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf) library aims to implement the

>     Pandas API on the GPU.  It gets good speedups (around 10x) on standard

Reviewer: What is your comparison for 10x? One GPU vs. one CPU core? One GPU vs. multi-core CPU? DGX-2 vs. some number of Spark nodes on ETL benchmark?

Author: Nothing serious, just a few simple spot checks.  I'll drop the claim.

Reviewer: I didn't want you to drop it! On the contrary, I just want you to make the claim stronger. We demonstrated (conservatively) more than 50x on ETL (Vs. Spark) at GTCE.

Author: Yeah, it's a complex topic though.  Lets address it with specifics another time.

    operations like reading CSV files, filtering and aggregating columns,
    joins, and so on.

    ```python
    import cudf  # looks and feels like Pandas, but runs on the GPU

    df = cudf.read_csv('myfile.csv')
    df = df[df.name == 'Alice']
    df.groupby('id').value.mean()
    ```

>     It is part of the growing [RAPIDS initiative](https://rapids.ai).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    cuDF is part of the growing [RAPIDS initiative](https://rapids.ai).
```

2.  The [Dask Dataframe](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/dataframe.html)
    library provides parallel algorithms around the Pandas API.  It composes
    large operations like distributed groupbys or distributed joins from a task
    graph of many smaller single-node groupbys or joins accordingly (and many
    [other operations](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/dataframe-api.html)).

    ```python
    import dask.dataframe as dd  # looks and feels like Pandas, but runs in parallel

    df = dd.read_csv('myfile.*.csv')
    df = df[df.name == 'Alice']
    df.groupby('id').value.mean().compute()
    ```

3.  The [Dask distributed task scheduler](https://distributed.dask.org)

>     provides general purpose parallel execution given complex task graphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    provides general-purpose parallel execution given complex task graphs.
```

    It's good for adding multi-node computing into an existing codebase.

Given these building blocks,

> our approach is to make cuDF look enough like Pandas that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our approach is to make the cuDF API close enough to Pandas that
```

> the Dask Dataframe algorithms can be reused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we can reuse the Dask Dataframe algorithms.
```

Benefits and Challenges to this approach
----------------------------------------

This approach has a few benefits:

1.  We get to reuse the parallel algorithms found in Dask Dataframe originally designed for Pandas.

>     (these were hard enough to get right the first time)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Seems unnecessary -- smart readers know that reusing good algorithms/implementations is important. If you keep it, rewrite it as a sentence; I don't think it needs to be parenthetical.

> 2.  It consolidates the development effort behind a single codebase so that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  It consolidates the development effort within a single codebase so that
```

    future effort spent on CPU Dataframes benefits GPU Dataframes and vice
    versa.  Maintenance costs are shared.

> 3.  By building code that works simultaneously with two Pandas implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  By building code that works equally with two DataFrame implementations
```

Reviewer: Shouldn't call cuDF a Pandas implementation.

>     (CPU and GPU) we start to establish conventions and protocols that will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    (CPU and GPU) we establish conventions and protocols that will
```

>     make it easy for other projects to do the same, either with these two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    make it easier for other projects to do the same, either with these two
```

    Pandas-like libraries, or with future Pandas-like libraries.

>     We start forcing the ecosystem to consider supporting Pandas-like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This approach also aims to demonstrate that the ecosystem should support Pandas-like
```

Reviewer: Forcing sounds... aggressive.

>     libraries, rather than just the single Pandas library.  For example if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    libraries, rather than just Pandas.  For example, if
```

    (when?) the Arrow library develops a computational system then we'll be in
    a better place to roll that in as well.

4.  When doing any refactor we tend to clean up existing code.

>     For example to make dask dataframe ready for a new GPU Parquet reader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For example, to make dask dataframe ready for a new GPU Parquet reader
```

    we end up [refactoring and simplifying our Parquet I/O logic](https://github.com/dask/dask/pull/4336).

> But also some drawbacks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The approach also has some drawbacks. Namely, it places API pressure on cuDF to match Pandas so:
```

> 1.  This places API pressure on cuDF to match Pandas so...

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> 2.  Slight differences in API now cause larger problems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Slight differences in API now cause larger problems, such as these:
```

    -  [Join column ordering differs rapidsai/cudf #251](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/issues/251)
    -  [Groupby aggregation column ordering differs rapidsai/cudf #483](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/issues/483#issuecomment-453218151)

> 3.  cuDF has some pressure on it to repeat what some believe to be mistakes in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  cuDF has some pressure on it to repeat what some believe to be mistakes in
```

    the Pandas API.

    For example, cuDF today supports missing values arguably more sensibly than

>     does Pandas.  Should cuDF have to revert to the old way of doing things

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Pandas.  Should cuDF have to revert to the old way of doing things
```

>     just to match Pandas semantics?  Dask Dataframe will probably have to need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    just to match Pandas semantics?  Dask Dataframe will probably need
```

>     to grow more flexible here to handle evolution and small differences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    to be more flexible in order to handle evolution and small differences
```

    in semantics.

Alternatives
------------

> We could also write a new dask-dataframe-style project around cuDF that was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could also write a new dask-dataframe-style project around cuDF that deviates
```

> more able to deviate from the Pandas/Dask Dataframe API.  Until recently this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the Pandas/Dask Dataframe API.  Until recently this
```

has actually been the approach, and the
[dask-cudf](https://github.com/rapidsai/dask-cudf) project did exactly this.
This was probably a good choice early on to get started and prototype things.
The project was able to implement a wide range of functionality including
groupby-aggregations, joins, and so on using
[dask delayed](https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/delayed.html).

We're redoing this now on top of dask dataframe though, which means that we're

> losing some functionality that dask-cudf had before, but hopefully the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
losing some functionality that dask-cudf already had, but hopefully the
```

import dask_cudf
from dask.distributed import Client

cluster = LocalCUDACluster()  # runs on eight local GPUs
client = Client(cluster)

gdf = dask_cudf.read_csv('data/nyc/many/*.csv')  # wrap around many CSV files

>>> gdf.passenger_count.sum().compute()
184464740
```

*Also note, NYC Taxi ridership is significantly less than it was a few years ago*

What I'm excited about in the example above
-------------------------------------------

-  All of the infrastructure surrounding the cuDF code, like the cluster setup,
   diagnostics, JupyterLab environment, and so on, came for free, like any
   other new Dask project.

   Here is an image of my JupyterLab setup

   <a href="https://matthewrocklin.com/blog/images/dask-cudf-environment.png">
     <img src="https://matthewrocklin.com/blog/images/dask-cudf-environment.png"
          alt="Dask + CUDA + cuDF JupyterLab environment"
          width="70%">
   </a>

-  Our `df` object is actually just a normal Dask Dataframe.  We didn't have to
   write new `__repr__`, `__add__`, or `.sum()` implementations, and probably
   many functions we didn't think about work well today (though also many
   don't).

> -  We're tightly integrated and more connected to other systems. For example if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  We're tightly integrated and more connected to other systems. For example, if
```

   we wanted to convert our dask-cudf-dataframe to a dask-pandas-dataframe then

>    we would use the standard cuDF function for this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   we would just use the cuDF `to_pandas` function:
```

   ```python
   df = df.map_partitions(cudf.DataFrame.to_pandas)
   ```

   We don't have to write anything special like a separate `.to_dask_dataframe`

>    method nor handle other special cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   method or handle other special cases.
```

>    The parallelism of Dask should be orthogonal to the choice of CPU/GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Dask parallelism is orthogonal to the choice of CPU or GPU.
```

-  It's easy to switch hardware.  By avoiding separate `dask-cudf` code paths

>    it's easier to add cuDF to an existing Dask+Pandas codebase if we get a GPU,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   it's easier to add cuDF to an existing Dask+Pandas codebase to run on GPUs,
```

Reviewer: "if we get a GPU" sounds weird. Who is we, and why do we have to share one GPU? :)

>    or remove cuDF and use Pandas if we want our code to be runnable by people

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   or to remove cuDF and use Pandas if we want our code to be runnable without GPUs.
```

>    who don't have GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>    We'll see more examples of this in the scaling section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   There are more examples of this in the scaling section below.
```

What's wrong with the example above
-----------------------------------

In general the answer is **many small things**.

1.  The `cudf.read_csv` function doesn't yet support reading chunks from a
    single CSV file, and so doesn't work well with very large CSV files.  We
    had to split our large CSV files into many smalle CSV files first with
    normal Dask+Pandas:

    ```python
    import dask.dataframe as dd
    (df = dd.read_csv('few-large/*.csv')
            .repartition(npartitions=100)
            .to_csv('many-small/*.csv', index=False))
    ```

    (See [rapidsai/cudf #568](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/issues/568))

2.  Many operations that used to work in dask-cudf like groupby-aggregations
    and joins no longer work.  We're going to need to slightly modify many cuDF

>     APIs over the next couple months to more closely match their Pandas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    APIs over the next couple of months to more closely match their Pandas
```

    equivalents.

3.  I ran the timing cell twice because it currently takes a few seconds to
    `import cudf` today.

>     [rapidsai/cudf #627](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/issues/627)

Reviewer: Anything that uses Numba JIT may also have JIT overhead. And there's also always overhead the first time you run a CUDA kernel, so some things will always be faster the second time you run them.

> 4.  We had to make Dask Dataframe a bit more flexible and assume less about its

Reviewer: You say this is a bad thing, but it's exactly what you were happy about "forcing the ecosystem to do" above... Maybe rephrase to be more consistent in your message?

    constituent dataframes being exactly Pandas dataframes.  (see
    [dask/dask #4359](https://github.com/dask/dask/pull/4359) and
    [dask/dask #4375](https://github.com/dask/dask/pull/4375) for examples).
    I suspect that there will by many more small changes like
    these necessary in the future.

> These problems are representative of dozens more similar issues.  They are are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These problems are representative of dozens more similar issues.  They are
```

all fixable and indeed, many are actively being fixed today by the [good folks

> working on RAPIDS](https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/graphs/contributors).

Reviewer 2: Note because of the branch-0.6 change this graph is empty.

Author: It seems to still be populated

Near Term Schedule
------------------

The RAPIDS group is currently busy working to release 0.5, which includes some
of the fixes necessary to run the example above, and also many unrelated
stability improvements.  This will probably keep them busy for a week or two
during which I don't expect to see much Dask + cuDF work going on other than
planning.

> After that, and for the next couple months this seems to be their priority, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, Dask parallelism support will be a top priority, so
```

computation of creating random data.

#### Dask DataFrame + cuDF on CSV data

We did a similar study on the `read_csv` example above, which is bound mostly
by reading CSV data from disk and then parsing it.  You can see a notebook
available
[here](https://gist.github.com/mrocklin/4b1b80d1ae07ec73f75b2a19c8e90e2e).  We
have similar (though less impressive) numbers to present.

<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Architecture</th>
    <th>Time</th>
    <th>Bandwidth</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th> Single CPU Core </th>
      <td> 3min 14s </td>
      <td> 50 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> Eight CPU Cores </th>
      <td> 58s </td>
      <td> 170 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> Forty CPU Cores </th>
      <td> 35s </td>
      <td> 285 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> One GPU </th>
      <td> 11s </td>
      <td> 900 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th> Eight GPUs </th>
      <td> 5s </td>
      <td> 2000 MB/s </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

*The bandwidth numbers were computed by noting that the data was around 10 GB on disk*

Analysis
--------

> First, lets appreciate again that it's easy to test a wide variety of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, I want to emphasize again that it's easy to test a wide variety of
```

architectures using this setup because of the Pandas API compatibility between
all of the different projects.  We're seeing a wide range of performance (40x
span) across a variety of different hardware with a wide range of cost points.

> Second lets note that this problem scales less well than our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, note that this problem scales less well than our
```

[previous example with CuPy](../../../2019/01/03/dask-array-gpus-first-steps),
both on CPU and GPU.
I suspect that this is because this example is also bound by I/O and not just
number-crunching.  While the jump from single-CPU to single-GPU is large, the
jump from single-CPU to many-CPU or single-GPU to many-GPU is not as large as
we would have liked.  For GPUs for example we got around a 2x speedup when we
added 8x as many GPUs.

At first one might think that this is because we're saturating disk read speeds.
However two pieces of evidence go against that guess:

-  NVIDIA folks familiar with my current hardware inform me that they're able to get

>    much more I/O when they're careful (TODO verify)

Author: cc @mt-jones

>    much more I/O when they're careful (TODO verify)

Reviewer: rephrase "more I/O" to be clearer. Do you mean "higher I/O throughput"?

-  The CPU scaling is similarly poor, despite the fact that it's obviously not
   reaching full I/O bandwidth

Instead, it's likely that we're just not treating our disks and IO pipelines
carefully.  Many simultaneous reads are causing contention, and (TODO need more
information from people familiar with the DGX).

We might consider working to think more carefully about data locality within a
single machine.  Alternatively, we might just choose to use a smaller machine,
or many smaller machines.  My team has been asking me to start playing with
some cheaper systems than a DGX, I may experiment with those soon.  It may be
that for data-loading and pre-processing workloads the previous wisdom of "pack
as much computation as you can into a single box" no longer holds
(without us doing more work that is).

### Come help!

If the work above sounds interesting to you then come help!
There is a lot of low-hanging and high impact work to do.

If you're interested in being paid to focus more on these topics, then consider

> applying for a job.  The NVIDIA corporation is hiring around the use of Dask

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applying for a job.  NVIDIA's RAPIDS team is looking to hire engineers for Dask development with GPUs.
```

> with GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

-  [Senior Library Software Engineer - RAPIDS](https://nvidia.wd5.myworkdayjobs.com/en-US/NVIDIAExternalCareerSite/job/US-TX-Austin/Senior-Library-Software-Engineer---RAPIDS_JR1919608-1)

> That's a fairly generic posting.  If you're interested the posting doesn't seem

Reviewer: Suggest dropping this ending and just say "and other data analytics library development projects" or something similar in the previous sentence.

Author: OK, will do.
